Observability main page (#46059)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/observability.adoc

== Telemetry

Telemetry contains data about the internal state of the system and can be split into categories or *signals*:

* *Logging*, classical local or distributed logs
* *Metrics*, metrics calculated in each Quarkus application instance
* *Tracing*, distributed tracing across applications
* *Profiling*, to analise and monitor the application's performance, resource usage, and runtime behavior
* *Events*, This is the most generic signal. It's a representation of a significant happening during the execution of a program.

== Guidelines

There is only a main guideline in Quarkus observability:

* The https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/protocol/[OpenTelemetry OTLP protocol] is the recommended way to send telemetry out of a Quarkus application. This provides a unified output for the application's telemetry.

== Overview

Some extensions have overlapping functionality and there are recommended extensions for each type of signal.

> The following table provides an overview of the observability extensions available in Quarkus, the signals they provide and with is the recommended extension for each signal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following table provides an overview of the observability extensions available in Quarkus, the signals they provide and which is the recommended extension for each signal.
```

|===
|Extension |Logging |Metrics |Tracing |Profiling |Health Check|Events

|xref:opentelemetry.adoc[quarkus-opentelemetry]
|O
|O
|R
|
|
|X

|xref:telemetry-micrometer.adoc[quarkus-micrometer]
|
|R
|
|
|
|

|xref:telemetry-micrometer-to-opentelemetry.adoc[quarkus-micrometer-opentelemetry]
|X
|R
|R
|
|
|X

|xref:jfr.adoc[quarkus-jfr]
|
|
|
|R
|
|X

|xref:logging.adoc[Logging in Quarkus]
|X
|
|
|
|
|

|xref:logging.adoc#json-logging[quarkus-logging-json]
|X
|
|
|
|
|

|xref:centralized-log-management.adoc[quarkus-logging-gelf]
|D
|
|
|
|
|
|===

- *R* - recommended
- *X* - supports
- *D* - deprecated
- *O* - off by default

== The signals

=== Logging and events

> We can say a log line is a type of event that includes a severity classification. The OpenTelemetry project recognizes this approach, resulting in an OpenTelemetry API for logs and events that is pry much the same.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can say a log line is a type of event that includes a severity classification. The OpenTelemetry project recognizes this approach, resulting in an OpenTelemetry API for logs and events that is pretty much the same.
```

In the future we'll see a convergence of these two concepts, as people start adopting OpenTelemetry Logs.

==== Quarkus logging extensions

Quarkus uses the *JBoss Log Manager* logging backend to publish application and framework logs either in the console or files. These logs can also be forwarded to a centralized logging system, either by using the legacy xref:centralized-log-management.adoc[`quarkus-logging-gelf`] extension or the recommended xref:opentelemetry.adoc[`quarkus-opentelemetry`] or xref:telemetry-micrometer-to-opentelemetry.adoc[`quarkus-micrometer-opentelemetry`] extensions.

OpenTelemetry logs are disabled by default in the `quarkus-opentelemetry` extension, but enabled by default in the `quarkus-micrometer-opentelemetry` extension.

==== Other events

There is no recommended way to generate observability events in Quarkus because the OpenTelemetry Events API is still under development and its use is not recommended, yet.

The xref:jfr.adoc[`quarkus-jfr`] extension can generate observability related events.

=== Metrics

> Quarkus uses the Micrometer to collect metrics from the application since a long time ago. Almost all the out-of-the-box metrics instrumentation in Quarkus is implemented with Micrometer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Quarkus has been using Micrometer to collect metrics from the application for a long time. Almost all the out-of-the-box metrics instrumentation in Quarkus is implemented with Micrometer.
```

More recently, OpenTelemetry Metrics has become available in the xref:opentelemetry.adoc[`quarkus-opentelemetry`] extension, but it's disabled by default because metrics semantic conventions are not stable yet.

The solution is to use the xref:telemetry-micrometer-to-opentelemetry.adoc[`quarkus-micrometer-opentelemetry`] extension to allow using *Micrometer metrics* and *OpenTelemetry logs and traces* at the same time with a unified output using the OTLP protocol. Manual OpenTelemetry metrics can also be created with this extension and all signals are enabled by default, for convenience.

=== Tracing

> Quarkus uses the OpenTelemetry Tracing to provide tracing capabilities to the application. The xref:opentelemetry.adoc[`quarkus-opentelemetry`] and the xref:telemetry-micrometer-to-opentelemetry.adoc[`quarkus-micrometer-opentelemetry`] extensions are the recommended way to use for tracing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Quarkus uses OpenTelemetry Tracing to provide tracing capabilities to the application. The xref:opentelemetry.adoc[`quarkus-opentelemetry`] and the xref:telemetry-micrometer-to-opentelemetry.adoc[`quarkus-micrometer-opentelemetry`] extensions are the recommended way to use for tracing.
```
